---
title: Chesterton's fence is not yours to remove
date: '2018-08-09 00:00:00'
---

Simon Willison, the creator of Django (the Python-based web framework, not the jazz musician or the movie), [tweets](https://twitter.com/simonw/status/1027368860712722432):

> NNIH: Not-Not-Invented-Here syndrome, where new engineers at an organization attempt to replace in-house solutions with off-the-shelf packages without understanding the process that lead to the custom solution

[One of the replies to this tweet](https://twitter.com/viorel_sfetea/status/1027464476889690112) points out that this is known as the _Chesterton's Fence Principle_, which I'd never heard of before. And I love a good principle, as you'll know if you've been reading along with these emails.

[The American Chesterton Society website](https://www.chesterton.org/taking-a-fence-down/) explains that the idea was used by John F. Kennedy, and comes from Chesterton's 1929 book, _The Thing_. It's fun to read because of Chesterton's wonderful way with words:

> In the matter of reforming things, as distinct from deforming them, there is one plain and simple principle; a principle which will probably be called a paradox. There exists in such a case a certain institution or law; let us say, for the sake of simplicity, a fence or gate erected across a road. The more modern type of reformer goes gaily up to it and says, “I don’t see the use of this; let us clear it away.” To which the more intelligent type of reformer will do well to answer: “If you don’t see the use of it, I certainly won’t let you clear it away. Go away and think. Then, when you can come back and tell me that you do see the use of it, I may allow you to destroy it.

I'm determined to use this exact quote in a conversation about software at some point in the future.

All the best,

-- Jim
